ERS-602-04
==========

Recent Topics in Sedimentology, Stratigraphy, and Geomorphology
---------------------------------------------------------------
_D.F. Belknap and R.L. Hooke - Spring 2014_
_Wednesdays, 1:00-2:00+ 203 Bryand Global Sciences Center_Introduction
------------
ERS-602-04, Recent Topics in Sedimentology and Stratigraphy is a graduate seminar for reading and discussion of recent papers in the broad areas of sedimentology, stratigraphy, marine geology, geoarchaeology, and Quaternary geology.  The specific areas will be determined by the interests of the class participants.  The goals of the course include development of skills in critical reading and analysis of professional papers, planning and leading discussions with peers of compelling and/or controversial topics, and participation in such a discussion in a productive and supportive teamwork-based mode. Assessment of learning results will be based on effectiveness in preparing and leading a topic, as well as participation in discussions on a week-by-week basis. The course will meet one hour each week in the spring semester.  One person each week will be responsible for a topic, leading the discussion.  Students and faculty participants will rotate responsibility for each week.  Discussion leaders will consult with me at least one week in advance on the topic, the papers involved, and a list of questions.  That person will then have a reference list and list of questions to guide reading and discussion prepared for handout at the course meeting one week prior to his or her scheduled day of responsibility.  The discussion leader will also have PDF copies of the papers ready for Dr. Belknap to place on the course First Class site, or if necessary, hard copies to be placed in Room 107 Bryand Global Sciences Center (the mail room).  Personal copies are your own responsibility.It has worked out best if the numbers of readings are limited to 2-3 papers, or a total of less than 20-40 printed pages (depending on numbers of figures), for effective discussion.  Another valid approach is to present two key short papers that need to be read in detail, and a longer document that can be skimmed for reference.  It has also worked out best if papers are contrasting, presenting different points of view.  Discussion and Reply papers in GSA Bull., Geology, Journal of Sedimentary Research, etc. are often a good starting point.
Schedule
--------- Jan. 15	Dan Belknap - Organizational Meeting                  - Jan. 22	Dan Belknap –  Bay-head deltas and backstepping- Jan. 29	Roger Hooke - Feb. 05	Joe Kelley	- Feb. 12	Robin Arnold – Isolation basin lakes and isostatic rebound - Feb. 19	Liz Cronkite- Feb. 26	Jacques Tardie- Mar. 05 	Spring Break- Mar. 12	Spring Break	- Mar. 19	NE-GSA- Mar. 26 	TBA- Apr. 02 	TBA   - Apr. 09	TBA - Apr. 16	TBA - Apr. 23	TBA - Apr. 30	TBA 