# ERS-602-04
_Wednesday, February 5, 2014_## Leader: Joe Kelley## Topic: Shelf Evolution, NC and TX
Continental shelves have experienced both transgression and regression during past glacial-interglacial cycles. It has become dogma that modern coasts have inherited important aspects of their geomorphology from the antecedent geology, or from deposits left over from past sea level changes. 

Here we look at two reviews of the shelf/coast of two very well studied locations. Texas is a low energy coast with an abundance of sediment to create past landforms and from which to generate sediment for modern landforms. North Carolina is a more sediment-starved area, with a narrow shelf and relatively large waves.## Reading List:
- Anderson, J.B., Wallace, D.J., Simms, A.R., Rodriguez, A.B. and Milliken, K.T., 2013, Variable response to coastal environments of the northwestern Gulf of Mexico to sea-level rise and climate change: implications for future change: Marine Geology (accepted and in press).- Thieler, E.R., Foster, D.S., Himmelstoss, E.A. and Mallinson, D.J., 2014, Geologic framework of the northern North Carolina coast and its influence on coastal evolution: Marine Geology v. 348, p. 113-130.## Questions:
1. What techniques/methods to the two papers bring to study their coasts?2. Texas looks at bays as well as the shelf, while NC does not. Is there likely a difference between NC and TX bay deposits?3. Is there a relationship between Pleistocene sedimentary deposits and contemporary coastal landforms?4. What are “sorted bedforms” and what do they indicate? Are they common in both areas?
5. Why are there capes in NC and not in TX … or are there capes in TX?6. How was the massive amount of work funded in the two study areas?