Estuarine sedimentary environments in response to Holocene sea-level change
===========================================================================
Wednesday, January 22, 2014, Dan Belknap
Topic
-----

Estuarine sedimentary environments in response to Holocene sea-level change.These three papers address estuarine coastal systems and attempt to interpret the stratigraphy in terms of process-response models and sea-level change.  They are from distinctly different regions with varying controls by sea-level change and other processes.  An underlying theme is how we may try to constrain evolution of coastal systems on the basis of local geology and processes, or alternatively strong control by externally driven sea-level and/or climatic events.  The undertone here is that climate events are the present day bandwagon – but we should be critical in our evaluation of something like the “8.2 ka event” as opposed to more local, complex systems interactions.       Readings
--------
- Rodriguez, A.B., Simms, A.R., and Anderson, J.B., 2010, Bay-head deltas across the northern Gulf of Mexico back step in response to an 8.2 ka cooling event: Quaternary Science Reviews: v. 29, p. 3983-3993.- Belknap, D.F., Gontz, A.M., and Kelley, J.T., 2005, Paleodeltas and preservation potential on a paraglacial coast – evolution of eastern Penobscot Bay, Maine.  Chapter 16. In: D.M. FitzGerald and J. Knight, eds., High Resolution Morphodynamics and Sedimentary Evolution of Estuaries.  Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, p. 335-360.- Dalrymple, R.W. and Zaitlin, B.A., 1994, High-resolution stratigraphy of a complex, incised valley succession, Cobequid Bay – Salmon River estuary, Bay of Fundy, Canada: Sedimentology, v. 41, no. 6, p. 1069-1091. Dec.Questions
---------
1.	Rodriguez et al. (2010) document abrupt flooding of subaerial delta plains in the northern Gulf of Mexico around 8.2 ka that they attribute to a global sea-level rise event.  How was their paleogeographic reconstruction constrained?  What materials were dated to peg the timing of the flooding, and how precise is this timing?  How would you evaluate the evidence for an exogenic (global sea-level forcing) cause, as opposed to local geomorphic and sedimentary process controls on this flooding event.
2.	Belknap et al. (2005) use similar techniques to evaluate “back-stepping” of a delta in the eastern Penobscot Bay, at a time not too different from the Rodriguez et al. (2010) example.  Note that after this paper had gone to press a radiocarbon date from the top of the Paleodelta came back as 8556 ± 191 cal ybp (Kelley et al., 2011).  How is the geologic setting different from the Gulf of Mexico example, and what additional constraints on sea-level change and sediment supply apply?  Do you think the “8.2 ka event” could be of significance in this system?  Liz, how do you think this evolutionary model might apply to New Meadows bay?Kelley, A.R., Kelley, J.T., Belknap, D.F. and Gontz, A.M., 2011, Coastal and terrestrial impact of the isostatically forced Late Quaternary drainage divide shift, Penobscot and Kennebec Rivers, Maine, USA: Journal of Coastal Research, v. 27, no. 6, p. 1085-1093. November
3.	The Dalrymple and Zaitlyn (1994) paper contains some aspects similar to each of the preceding papers.  What caused the formation and later abandonment of the lower delta sequence.  What ages constrain the primary unconformity between the lower and upper sequence.  How much are the upper estuarine facies controlled by sea-level changes, by sediment supply, or by distribution of processes of waves, tides, and sediment supply within the estuary? 